Networking for DevOps: A Practical Guide
Welcome to the Networking & DevOps Fundamentals repository! This project is designed to help you master essential networking concepts, protocols, and tools that are crucial for DevOps engineers. Whether you're a beginner or looking to brush up on your skills, this repository provides hands-on tasks, real-world examples, and practical guides to deepen your understanding.
1. OSI & TCP/IP Models
•	OSI Model: Understand the 7 layers of the OSI model and their functions.
•	TCP/IP Model: Learn about the 4 layers of the TCP/IP model and how they map to the OSI model.
•	Real-World Examples:
o	Application Layer: HTTP/HTTPS for web browsing.
o	Transport Layer: TCP for reliable data transfer, UDP for streaming.
o	Network Layer: IP for routing packets between devices.
o	Data Link Layer: Ethernet for local network communication.
o	Physical Layer: Cables, switches, and hubs for physical connectivity.
2. Protocols and Ports for DevOps
•	Common Protocols:
o	HTTP (Port 80): Web communication.
o	HTTPS (Port 443): Secure web communication.
o	FTP (Port 21): File transfer.
o	SSH (Port 22): Secure remote access.
o	DNS (Port 53): Domain name resolution.
•	Relevance to DevOps:
o	HTTP/HTTPS: Essential for web applications and APIs.
o	SSH: Critical for remote server management.
o	DNS: Important for service discovery and load balancing.
3. AWS EC2 and Security Groups
•	Step-by-Step Guide:
1.	Launch an EC2 Instance:
	Log in to AWS Management Console.
	Navigate to EC2 and click "Launch Instance."
	Choose an Amazon Machine Image (AMI) and instance type.
	Configure instance details and add storage.
	Configure Security Groups to allow SSH (Port 22) and HTTP (Port 80).
	Launch the instance and connect using SSH.
2.	Configure Security Groups:
	Define inbound and outbound rules to control traffic.
	Restrict access to specific IP addresses for enhanced security.
4. Networking Commands Cheat Sheet
•	Essential Commands:
o	ping: Check connectivity to a host.
ping google.com
o	traceroute / tracert: Trace the route packets take to reach a host.
traceroute google.com
o	netstat: Display network connections, routing tables, and interface statistics.
netstat -tuln
o	curl: Make HTTP requests from the command line.
curl -I https://google.com
o	dig / nslookup: Perform DNS lookups.
dig google.com
nslookup google.com

